::: center
**The Healthcare Liasion Officer: An Intervention Framework to Promote
Health and Huamnity within Canada's Federal Carceral System**\
Ben Lipovski\
SPPH 481C Term Paper\
April 16, 2023
:::

# Literature Review

Since the introduction of the 1984 Canada Health Act, Canadians have
enjoyed the benefits of universal medicade; however, the same cannot be
said for its prison population [@{.Scallan+2021}]. Although there is
disagreement about how those who break the rules should be punished,
there is little discourse on the basic human rights of individuals who
are incarcerated [@{.Scallan+2021}; @bks.Gardner2022]. Simply put, the
most vocal voices that argue for more intense criminal punishments often
have little or no first-hand account of the day-to-day experiences of
those serving time [@{.Scallan+2021}]. Although landmark legislation of
the Canada Health Act transitioned Canada into a new healthcare era,
Canada's incarcerated population purposely[^1] left out of its benefits
[@{.Scallan+2021}; @sc.CCRA1992]. Whether for political or punishment
reasons, it does not matter; no system can exist that does not meet the
basic human rights of the individual, incarcerated or not
[@rprt.UnitedNations1955; @rprt.UnitedNations2016; @{.Scallan+2021}; @bks.Venters2022].

Today, Canada's federally incarcerated population, or those who face
sentences greater than two years, falls under the mandate of the
Corrections and Conditional Release Act (CCRA) of 1992
[@{.Scallan+2021}]. Under such measures, healthcare is financed and
administered by the Correctional Service of Canada (CSC), under the
authority of the federal ministry of public safety. Although such
arrangements have been subject to decades of debate, their outcomes are
clear, as Canadians incarcerated have higher rates of mortality and
morbidity than those within the free community
[@{.Scallan+2021}; @{.Kouyoumdjian+2016}; @{.McLeod+2020}; @bks.Venters2022].
For the purposes of this paper, such figures will not be a considerable
topic of discussion due to the lack of currently available evidence and
clear disparities in health and outcomes.

In the 26 years since the establishment of the CCRA, limited progress
has been made in addressing health inequalities within Canada's federal
carceral system [@{.Scallan+2021}]. As the scholarly literature
continues to accelerate understandings of the intersections of Canada's
criminal-legal system, or rather \"non-system\" as coined by some, the
day-to-day functions of CSC's penitentiaries remain stagnant
[@bks.Venters2022; @{.Scallan+2021}]. Although discourse and debate
about degree and causation dominate both scholarly and contemporary
communications, the original dialogue that sparked such matters becomes
seemingly trivialised to the larger picture
[@{.McLeod+2020a}; @{.McLeod+2021}; @{.Hu+2020}]. In other words, the
focus shifts away from the individuals struggling to survive the
dysfunctions; everyday left of their sentence, surrounded by barriers
purposefully erected to restrict their freedoms, governed by legislation
as minuscule as society cares for them
[@{.McLeod+2020a}; @{.McLeod+2021}; @{.Hu+2020}]. While radical change
will undoubtedly be part efforts of a future system that upholds justice
and human dignity, we cannot neglect the individuals who live within the
walls of today's dysfunctions. Critically, it is this resilience that
continues to drive progressive change and the consensus on how society
should approach crime, punishment, and rehabilitation
[@bks.Coyle2014; @bks.Restellini2014; @bks.Venters2022]. While it is
easy to label the dysfunctions of the CSC, and their administration and
provision of healthcare services, its effects will simply add decades of
inaction since the CCRA's inception. Hence, this paper uses an
individual-based approach to target the cyclic health inequalities
generated from the dysfunctions of the CSC's healthcare systems. Given
the uncertainties and complexities of the release and transfer of an
individual between healthcare authorities, this paper seeks to introduce
an intervention framework that fits the current logistic timeline, so
that consensus can be reached for the promotion of health within the
legal, financial, and political bureaucratic constraints.

# Commentary

Solving any systematic problem, let alone all of them together, is as
complex a challenge as even selecting a place to approach it. Moreover,
reintroducing new frameworks to intervene in any challenge is not
without complication, as new problems could arise or efforts could go
without any benefit. Although a complex web of flawed moving parts
exists, such an intervention should not ignore its existence. Therefore,
the purpose of this intervention is to use the systems already present
to build on the already known strengths and develop a meaningful
short-term impact on a current and pressing challenge.

## The Healthcare Liaison Officer (HLO)

Given the humanistic approach of this paper, individuals working within
the Healthcare Liaison Officers' (HLO) authority set out their mandate.
Along the already established logistic and managerial chain of command,
the HLO would be a front-line staff member responsible for bridging the
divide between the CSC and provincial and territorial health
authorities. Although all provinces and territories must provide
universal medicare under the provisions of the Canada Health Act (1984),
vast provisional, administrative, and logistical differences bring
rationalised complexities and quirks [@{.Scallan+2021}]. While
significant financial burdens would exist, we argue that thirteen HLO's
should exist, such that they can provide accurate and knowledgeable
insight in navigating their respective system. Figure 1 provides a
visualisation of the location HLO's have on the managerial chain within
the CSC and Ministry of Public Safety.

HLO's will work one-on-one with individuals prior, during, and after
their release, ideally to the maximum caseloads permit. Working
alongside parole officers, family and friends, and other stakeholders
individually involved will provide education of available services and
act as a middleman in transferring one's healthcare file. With the
location under the CSC's commissioner, this intervention takes advantage
of the strengths of the current system to decrease managerial expenses
and bureaucracy[^2] While the HLO's are core to this intervention, the
outcomes remain in control of those at the forefront of the carceral
system. Critically, this is not to say that these individuals have total
control over the fate of their actions. The choice to remain engaged
with the healthcare system is deeply ingrained in their
intersectionalities and beliefs about its effectiveness for their own
life [@{.Henning2021}; @{.Kouyoumdjian+2016}]. Although the health and
wellness of individuals ultimately come to their own willingness to
access and engage in services, it is the responsibility of the system to
provide ease in accessing realistic care. With consideration of the
\"duopoly of responsibility\", the following sections of this paper will
discuss the two core mandates of this framework: education and
continuity of care.

![Managerial Organization of the Health Care Lesion Officers (HLO),
within the Correction Service of Canada (CSC) and Ministry of Public
Safety.](images/Plan-B.jpg){#fig:my_label width="0.9\\linewidth"}

## Healthcare Education

The ladder of this statement is critical to focus on, as people facing
incarceration are less likely to engage in the healthcare system. When
within the carceral setting, much of the healthcare received was often
outside the individuals' control or with heavy strings attached, such as
being required to be directly witnessed by correctional staff without
objection.

For any Canadian, let alone individuals incarcerated, the health systems
of Canada are complex, often changing, and vague [@{.Scallan+2021}]. For
individuals who transfer from the CSC authority, such issues are
magnified from years of solitude, before even considering the
demographical position in which the prison population of Canada is based
[@{.Scallan+2021}]. Although information is critical to maintaining
health, the ability to speak and interact with another person who
understands one's position is transformative [@{.Kouyoumdjian+2018}].
Understanding the hesitations people face when simply speaking with a
healthcare professional after years of distrust and trauma from
authoritative figures is the principle of this mandate
[@{.Henning2021}; @{.Kouyoumdjian+2018}]. Furthermore, the ability to
form such interpersonal relationships after release is reflected in
lower mortality and morbidity rates
[@{.Kouyoumdjian+2018}; @bks.Gardner2022; @{.McLeod+2020a}; @{.McLeod+2021}].
Although its effects have been limited to those with quality
relationships before and during their sentence, the presented
intervention presents an opportunity to extrapolate such effects.
Furthermore, while providing education and guidance to the available
services that meet the needs of an individual is progressive alone,
creating an environment capable of building meaningful connections is
beyond quantifiable figures
[@bks.Gardner2022; @{.McLeod+2020a}; @{.McLeod+2021}]. As the first
mandate of this intervention framework, education and human connection
provide conditions such that individuals can and believe that they can
achieve better health.

## Continuity of Care

Likewise with all healthcare services in the community, maintaining
continuity of care is a pillar of medicine and the promotion of patient
health and well-being [@{.Hu+2020}]. In parallel with the mandates of
the Mandela rules, healthcare in the carceral setting should maintain
all resemblance to the community, including its services over time
[@{.Hu+2020}; @rprt.UnitedNations1955]. While the transition of
healthcare from the CSC to the respective province or territory is a
significant barrier to continuity, this paper argues that it is an
opportunity, as discussed in the previous section on education. In
addition to easing stains during file transfers, the ability to
recommend \"new\" services, such as safe needle exchanges that receive
little to no attention within the CSC, is a clear advantage
[@{.Kronfli+2021}; @bks.Gardner2022; @{.Kouyoumdjian+2018}; @{.Hu+2020}].

Although this paper will not discuss the specifics of its
administration, these principles of continuity of care are discussed
below. First, the CSC should provide a complete and comprehensive file
of the services and history provided during the course during which the
individual was incarcerated. Such information should be delivered to the
HLO in a timely manner to ensure the ease of one's transition over the
rapid events post-release. Second, the presented file should ideally be
covered by as few individuals as possible to ensure consistency in
personnel and information available for a given individual. Together,
both steps should enable the HLO to act as a intermediary not only for
information but also for emotional stressors released on an individual.
Similarly, the continuity of care by the HLO from the CSC to the
provincial or territorial health authority should promote humanity and
interpersonal relationships to foster trust and belonging. Furthermore,
while an individual is crossing a jurisdictional limbo, they should feel
a sense of care and compassion from those who have access and authority
over their file. As a common complaint in the community healthcare
setting is the lack of compassion of healthcare personnel, the role of
the HLO should be to act as an individual that is consistently present
and is consistently available for questions and concerns. The third
point is essentially the result of continuity of care; by working with
quality and knowledgeable personnel, the jurisdictions of health are not
just bridges; they serve as a jumping point for new services previously
unknown. The work of the HLO not only provides ease in one release from
federal custody, but helps it achieve better health outcomes, where the
system and its people work together. Thus, the second mandate of this
intervention framework seeks to further the aforementioned concept of
the \"duopoly of responsibility\". When both the individual, care
providers, and the system in general are aimed at improving health and
wellness, the individual is more likely to continue working towards such
objectives [@{.Hu+2020}; @bks.Venters2022; @rprt.UnitedNations2016].

# Conclusion

While the superficial mandate of this intervention is education and the
promotion of continuity of healthcare, its primary strength is the
individual that work within it. Under the guidance of the HLO,
evidence-based care is provided within an environment that promotes
interpersonal relationships towards the betterment of one's health and
wellness. While its no question that the present system is
dysfunctional, the same system still has the power to make progressive
change. It is this resilience that will continue to change the path of
Canada's carceral system such that justice and human rights can be
achieved within tomorrow's criminal-[justice]{.underline} system.

[^1]: Note. The term \"purposefully\" is used in the context of legality
    legislation and statute

[^2]: Note. While not discussed in this paper, we acknowledge the
    transparency and effectiveness of such a system must be diligently
    supervised by the CSC's external ombudsperson: the Office of the
    Correctional Investigator.
