---
title: "The Healthcare Liasion Officer: An Intervention Framework to Promote Health and Huamnity within Canada's Federal Carceral System"
date: 2023-04-16
author: "Ben Lipovski"
draft: false
image: /images/ubc.jpg
description: "This is a placeholder for a writing sample or project."
---

## Literature Review

Since the introduction of the 1984 Canada Health Act, Canadians have
enjoyed the benefits of universal medicade; however, the same cannot be
said for its prison population \[1\]. Although there is disagreement
about how those who break the rules should be punished, there is little
discourse on the basic human rights of individuals who are incarcerated
\[1,2\]. Simply put, the most vocal voices that argue for more intense
criminal punishments often have little or no first-hand account of the
day-to-day experiences of those serving time \[1\]. Although landmark
legislation of the Canada Health Act transitioned Canada into a new
healthcare era, Canada’s incarcerated population purposely[^Note A] left out
of its benefits \[1,3\]. Whether for political or punishment reasons, it
does not matter; no system can exist that does not meet the basic human
rights of the individual, incarcerated or not \[1,4–6\].

Today, Canada’s federally incarcerated population, or those who face
sentences greater than two years, falls under the mandate of the
Corrections and Conditional Release Act (CCRA) of 1992 \[1\]. Under such
measures, healthcare is financed and administered by the Correctional
Service of Canada (CSC), under the authority of the federal ministry of
public safety. Although such arrangements have been subject to decades
of debate, their outcomes are clear, as Canadians incarcerated have
higher rates of mortality and morbidity than those within the free
community \[1,6–8\]. For the purposes of this paper, such figures will
not be a considerable topic of discussion due to the lack of currently
available evidence and clear disparities in health and outcomes.

In the 26 years since the establishment of the CCRA, limited progress
has been made in addressing health inequalities within Canada’s federal
carceral system \[1\]. As the scholarly literature continues to
accelerate understandings of the intersections of Canada’s
criminal-legal system, or rather "non-system" as coined by some, the
day-to-day functions of CSC’s penitentiaries remain stagnant \[1,6\].
Although discourse and debate about degree and causation dominate both
scholarly and contemporary communications, the original dialogue that
sparked such matters becomes seemingly trivialised to the larger picture
\[9–11\]. In other words, the focus shifts away from the individuals
struggling to survive the dysfunctions; everyday left of their sentence,
surrounded by barriers purposefully erected to restrict their freedoms,
governed by legislation as minuscule as society cares for them \[9–11\].
While radical change will undoubtedly be part efforts of a future system
that upholds justice and human dignity, we cannot neglect the
individuals who live within the walls of today’s dysfunctions.
Critically, it is this resilience that continues to drive progressive
change and the consensus on how society should approach crime,
punishment, and rehabilitation \[6,12,13\]. While it is easy to label
the dysfunctions of the CSC, and their administration and provision of
healthcare services, its effects will simply add decades of inaction
since the CCRA’s inception. Hence, this paper uses an individual-based
approach to target the cyclic health inequalities generated from the
dysfunctions of the CSC’s healthcare systems. Given the uncertainties
and complexities of the release and transfer of an individual between
healthcare authorities, this paper seeks to introduce an intervention
framework that fits the current logistic timeline, so that consensus can
be reached for the promotion of health within the legal, financial, and
political bureaucratic constraints.

## Commentary

Solving any systematic problem, let alone all of them together, is as
complex a challenge as even selecting a place to approach it. Moreover,
reintroducing new frameworks to intervene in any challenge is not
without complication, as new problems could arise or efforts could go
without any benefit. Although a complex web of flawed moving parts
exists, such an intervention should not ignore its existence. Therefore,
the purpose of this intervention is to use the systems already present
to build on the already known strengths and develop a meaningful
short-term impact on a current and pressing challenge.

### Healthcare Liaison Officer

Given the humanistic approach of this paper, individuals working within
the Healthcare Liaison Officers’ (HLO) authority set out their mandate.
Along the already established logistic and managerial chain of command,
the HLO would be a front-line staff member responsible for bridging the
divide between the CSC and provincial and territorial health
authorities. Although all provinces and territories must provide
universal medicare under the provisions of the Canada Health Act (1984),
vast provisional, administrative, and logistical differences bring
rationalised complexities and quirks \[1\]. While significant financial
burdens would exist, we argue that thirteen HLO’s should exist, such
that they can provide accurate and knowledgeable insight in navigating
their respective system. Figure 1 provides a visualisation of the
location HLO’s have on the managerial chain within the CSC and Ministry
of Public Safety.

HLO’s will work one-on-one with individuals prior, during, and after
their release, ideally to the maximum caseloads permit. Working
alongside parole officers, family and friends, and other stakeholders
individually involved will provide education of available services and
act as a middleman in transferring one’s healthcare file. With the
location under the CSC’s commissioner, this intervention takes advantage
of the strengths of the current system to decrease managerial expenses
and bureaucracy[^Note B] While the HLO’s are core to this intervention, the
outcomes remain in control of those at the forefront of the carceral
system. Critically, this is not to say that these individuals have total
control over the fate of their actions. The choice to remain engaged
with the healthcare system is deeply ingrained in their
intersectionalities and beliefs about its effectiveness for their own
life \[7,14\]. Although the health and wellness of individuals
ultimately come to their own willingness to access and engage in
services, it is the responsibility of the system to provide ease in
accessing realistic care. With consideration of the "duopoly of
responsibility", the following sections of this paper will discuss the
two core mandates of this framework: education and continuity of care.

![Managerial Organization of the Health Care Lesion Officers (HLO),
within the Correction Service of Canada (CSC) and Ministry of Public
Safety.](/images/hcLiasionDiagram.jpg)

### Healthcare Education

The ladder of this statement is critical to focus on, as people facing
incarceration are less likely to engage in the healthcare system. When
within the carceral setting, much of the healthcare received was often
outside the individuals’ control or with heavy strings attached, such as
being required to be directly witnessed by correctional staff without
objection.

For any Canadian, let alone individuals incarcerated, the health systems
of Canada are complex, often changing, and vague \[1\]. For individuals
who transfer from the CSC authority, such issues are magnified from
years of solitude, before even considering the demographical position in
which the prison population of Canada is based \[1\]. Although
information is critical to maintaining health, the ability to speak and
interact with another person who understands one’s position is
transformative \[15\]. Understanding the hesitations people face when
simply speaking with a healthcare professional after years of distrust
and trauma from authoritative figures is the principle of this mandate
\[14,15\]. Furthermore, the ability to form such interpersonal
relationships after release is reflected in lower mortality and
morbidity rates \[2,9,10,15\]. Although its effects have been limited to
those with quality relationships before and during their sentence, the
presented intervention presents an opportunity to extrapolate such
effects. Furthermore, while providing education and guidance to the
available services that meet the needs of an individual is progressive
alone, creating an environment capable of building meaningful
connections is beyond quantifiable figures \[2,9,10\]. As the first
mandate of this intervention framework, education and human connection
provide conditions such that individuals can and believe that they can
achieve better health.

### Continuity of Care

Likewise with all healthcare services in the community, maintaining
continuity of care is a pillar of medicine and the promotion of patient
health and well-being \[11\]. In parallel with the mandates of the
Mandela rules, healthcare in the carceral setting should maintain all
resemblance to the community, including its services over time \[4,11\].
While the transition of healthcare from the CSC to the respective
province or territory is a significant barrier to continuity, this paper
argues that it is an opportunity, as discussed in the previous section
on education. In addition to easing stains during file transfers, the
ability to recommend "new" services, such as safe needle exchanges that
receive little to no attention within the CSC, is a clear advantage
\[2,11,15,16\].

Although this paper will not discuss the specifics of its
administration, these principles of continuity of care are discussed
below. First, the CSC should provide a complete and comprehensive file
of the services and history provided during the course during which the
individual was incarcerated. Such information should be delivered to the
HLO in a timely manner to ensure the ease of one’s transition over the
rapid events post-release. Second, the presented file should ideally be
covered by as few individuals as possible to ensure consistency in
personnel and information available for a given individual. Together,
both steps should enable the HLO to act as a intermediary not only for
information but also for emotional stressors released on an individual.
Similarly, the continuity of care by the HLO from the CSC to the
provincial or territorial health authority should promote humanity and
interpersonal relationships to foster trust and belonging. Furthermore,
while an individual is crossing a jurisdictional limbo, they should feel
a sense of care and compassion from those who have access and authority
over their file. As a common complaint in the community healthcare
setting is the lack of compassion of healthcare personnel, the role of
the HLO should be to act as an individual that is consistently present
and is consistently available for questions and concerns. The third
point is essentially the result of continuity of care; by working with
quality and knowledgeable personnel, the jurisdictions of health are not
just bridges; they serve as a jumping point for new services previously
unknown. The work of the HLO not only provides ease in one release from
federal custody, but helps it achieve better health outcomes, where the
system and its people work together. Thus, the second mandate of this
intervention framework seeks to further the aforementioned concept of
the "duopoly of responsibility". When both the individual, care
providers, and the system in general are aimed at improving health and
wellness, the individual is more likely to continue working towards such
objectives \[5,6,11\].

## Conclusion

While the superficial mandate of this intervention is education and the
promotion of continuity of healthcare, its primary strength is the
individual that work within it. Under the guidance of the HLO,
evidence-based care is provided within an environment that promotes
interpersonal relationships towards the betterment of one’s health and
wellness. While its no question that the present system is
dysfunctional, the same system still has the power to make progressive
change. It is this resilience that will continue to change the path of
Canada’s carceral system such that justice and human rights can be
achieved within tomorrow’s criminal-**justice** system.

---

## References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body" markdown="1">

<div id="ref-Scallan2021" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">1. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Scallan E, Lancaster K, Kouyoumdjian F. [The
“problem” of health: An analysis of health care provision in Canada’s
federal prisons](https://doi.org/10.1177/1363459319846940). Health
(London). 2021 Jan 1;25(1):3–20. </span>

</div>

<div id="ref-bksGardner2022" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">2. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Gardner TM, Mistak D. Caring Less: Treatment of
Mental Health and Addiction in Carceral Settings. In: Weil AR, Reichert
AJ, Feiden K, editors. Reducing the Health Harms of Incarceration
\[Internet\]. Washington, DC: Aspen Health Strategy Group; 2022. p.
43–59. Available from:
<https://www.aspeninstitute.org/publications/reducing-the-health-harms-of-incarceration/></span>

</div>

<div id="ref-scCCRA1992" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">3. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Government of Canada. Corrections and
Conditional Release Act \[Internet\]. S.C. Jun 18, 1992 p. 192.
Available from:
<https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/c-44.6/page-1.html></span>

</div>

<div id="ref-rprtUnitedNations1955" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">4. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">United Nations. Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners \[Internet\]. Geneva, CH: First United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime & the Treatment of Offenders; 1955
p. 14. Available from:
<https://www.un.org/en/events/mandeladay/mandela_rules.shtml></span>

</div>

<div id="ref-rprtUnitedNations2016" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">5. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">United Nations. Compendium of United Nations
Standards and Norms in Crime prevention and criminal justice
\[Internet\]. Vienna, AT: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; 2016
p. 1–454. Report No.: V.16-00685. Available from:
<https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/justice-and-prison-reform/compendium.html></span>

</div>

<div id="ref-bksVenters2022" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">6. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Venters H. The Hidden World of Correctional
Health. In: Weil AR, Reichert AJ, Feiden K, editors. Reducing the Health
Harms of Incarceration \[Internet\]. Washington, DC: Aspen Health
Strategy Group; 2022. p. 25–39. Available from:
<https://www.aspeninstitute.org/publications/reducing-the-health-harms-of-incarceration/></span>

</div>

<div id="ref-Kouyoumdjian2016" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">7. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Kouyoumdjian F, Schuler A, Matheson FI, Hwang
SW. Health status of prisoners in Canada. Canadian Family Physician
\[Internet\]. 2016 Mar;63(3):215–22. Available from:
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4984599/></span>

</div>

<div id="ref-McLeod2020b" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">8. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">McLeod KE, Butler A, Young JT, Southalan L,
Borschmann R, Sturup-Toft S, et al. [Global Prison Health Care
Governance and Health Equity: A Critical Lack of
Evidence](https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2019.305465). Am J Public Health.
2020 Mar 1;110(3):303–8. </span>

</div>

<div id="ref-McLeod2020a" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">9. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">McLeod KE, Korchinski M, Young P, Milkovich T,
Hemingway C, DeGroot M, et al. [Supporting women leaving prison through
peer health mentoring: A participatory health research
study](https://doi.org/10.9778/cmajo.20190106). cmajo. 2020
Jan;8(1):E1–8. </span>

</div>

<div id="ref-McLeod2021" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">10. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">McLeod KE, Timler K, Korchinski M, Young P,
Milkovich T, McBride C, et al. [Supporting people leaving prisons during
COVID-19: Perspectives from peer health
mentors](https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPH-09-2020-0069). IJPH. 2021 Oct
18;17(3):206–16. </span>

</div>

<div id="ref-Hu2020" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">11. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Hu C, Jurgutis J, Edwards D, O’Shea T,
Regenstreif L, Bodkin C, et al. [“When you first walk out the
gates…where do \[you\] go?”: Barriers and opportunities to achieving
continuity of health care at the time of release from a provincial jail
in Ontario](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0231211). Knittel A,
editor. PLoS ONE. 2020 Apr 10;15(4):e0231211. </span>

</div>

<div id="ref-bksCoyle2014" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">12. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Coyle A. Chapter 2: Standards in prison health:
The prisoner as a patient. In: Enggist S, Møller L, Galea G, Udesen C,
editors. Prisons and Health \[Internet\]. Copenhagen, DK: WHO Regional
Office for Europe; 2014. p. 6–10. Available from:
<https://www.who.int/europe/publications/i/item/9789289050593></span>

</div>

<div id="ref-bksRestellini2014" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">13. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Restellini JP, Restellini R. Chapter 3: <span
class="nocase">Prison-specific</span> ethical and clinical problems. In:
Enggist S, Møller L, Galea G, Udesen C, editors. Prisons and Health
\[Internet\]. Copenhagen, DK: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2014. p.
11–8. Available from:
<https://www.who.int/europe/publications/i/item/9789289050593></span>

</div>

<div id="ref-Henning2021" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">14. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Henning C. The Physical and Mental Health of
Incarcerated Persons: A Canadian Perspective. Journal of
Multidisciplinary Research at Trent \[Internet\]. 2021 Dec 31;3(1).
Available from:
<https://ojs.trentu.ca/ojs/index.php/jmrt/article/view/341></span>

</div>

<div id="ref-Kouyoumdjian2018" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">15. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Kouyoumdjian FG, Cheng SY, Fung K, Orkin AM,
McIsaac KE, Kendall C, et al. [The health care utilization of people in
prison and after prison release: A population-based cohort study in
Ontario, Canada](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0201592). PLoS
One. 2018 Aug 3;13(8):e0201592. </span>

</div>

<div id="ref-Kronfli2021" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">16. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Kronfli N, Dussault C, Bartlett S, Fuchs D,
Kaita K, Harland K, et al. [Disparities in hepatitis C care across
Canadian provincial prisons: Implications for hepatitis C
micro-elimination](https://doi.org/10.3138/canlivj-2020-0035). CanLivJ.
2021 Aug 1;4(3):292–310. </span>

</div>

</div>

[^Note A]: Note. The term "purposefully" is used in the context of legality
    legislation and statute

[^Note B]: Note. While not discussed in this paper, we acknowledge the
    transparency and effectiveness of such a system must be diligently
    supervised by the CSC’s external ombudsperson: the Office of the
    Correctional Investigator.
